So in the first of these extras we're going to see how you can use Bluetooth with your Android apps
Bluetooth if you haven't come across it is a very widely used technology to connect phones to phones
and increasingly phones to other things.
So if you want to check it out check out Bluetooth dot com and it's particularly becoming popular with
things like smart homes and smart devices and wearable devices to connect all your devices together.
That's a really useful technology to be able to work with.
And we're going to see how to do everything that you'll need with Bluetooth right here.
So let's go into Android studio and create a new project we'll call it Bluetooth demo all the usual
settings.
And finish.
All right.
The main anticlimax of this video I'll warn you in advance is that you can't use Bluetooth at all on
the simulator or the emulator.
So we're not going to be able to actually actively test this.
And for me to show you it's finally working but I am going to create a completely working Bluetooth
app which then you can run on your Android phone and get it working exactly as it is here.
So we'll see all the code but we won't be able to actually test it and see it in action.
All right.
So the first thing that we need to work with Bluetooth is our Bluetooth adapter variable
and we normally call that B-A for obvious reasons.
So we create our Bluetooth adapter variable and that allows us to work with bleaters in the same way
that we use a location manager to work with location.
OK.
Now the first thing we're going to need to do is check whether the user has bluetooth turned on and
if they don't then attempt to turn it on.
So B.A our Bluetooth adapter has a nice method built in called is enabled.
You can see a couple of the other methods that you might want to use later on as well.
And we can use that that's just Boullion so we can test that and say if
it's enabled
then we might do a quick toast to tell the user that it's already on or because we're testing here to
tell us.
So let's do that's
the application context and something like Bluetooth is on
length long.
Sure.
Now you know we've got an error there.
That's because we haven't enabled the Bluetooth permission in the manifest but you can see it's just
done that for us now.
And there it is.
OK.
So now we've checked to see if Bluetooth is on if it's not.
We're going to try and turn it on and we actually do that with an intent because we're going beyond
the bounds of this individual app here.
So it will create an intent
which is a new intent and this time we're heading to the bluetooth adapter.
And again loads of different options that you might want to use if you're working with Bluetooth but
the one we want is action request enable.
So that will attempt to enable Bluetooth and then we'll stop that activity.
So that will attempt to enable the Bluetooth will then do another check to see if
Bluetooth enabled.
And once again we'll make a toast
and just to clarify the difference we'll say Bluetooth has now been turned on.
So that's a very simple check to see if Bluetooth is on and if it's not attempt to turn it on and then
test again to see if they Tempur successful it could be that there's a problem with bluetooth on the
user's phone or the phone doesn't even have Bluetooth.
So you should never assume that Bluetooth is working just because you've requested the adapter to be
enabled.
OK.
We're now going to set up a few different options and to do that we'll have some buttons in SML lú file.
So let's get rid of hello world and bring in a few buttons.
So we'll have first off
turn Bluetooth off.
Them we'll have another button which looks for discoverable devices.
So if you've worked with Bluetooth you've probably done this process of searching for your new earphones
on smartwatch or whatever it is
finding discoverable to discoverable devices.
So we'll see in a minute how to do that.
And then we'll add our third and final button.
See
a few pad devices.
So these are going to be the devices which are already paired with the phone.
And finally we'll just add a list view to allow.
They paired devices to be displayed
we get
that pad devices list.
OK.
So once we finished the code for this app you should be able to use this to turn Bluetooth off find
discoverable devices and to view Pead devices as well.
OK.
So let's just set up some methods for each of these.
First of all turn Bluetooth off and I'm going to do this one by one.
So I jump back over to main activity and then create a method.
Turn Bluetooth off of course it's going to be called by the button view
and turning Bluetooth off is actually really really simple.
It's B.A dot disable.
Simple as that.
And we're going to need to add Bluetooth admin to our Android manifest for that to work as well.
So we need the permission to be able to control Bluetooth and then I'll just add a toast
to confirm that.
And we should probably do another check just to make sure that it worked.
So if it's still enabled
we'll add a toast saying Bluetooth could not be disabled otherwise.
Bluetooth turned off
OK.
So that's how you turn off Bluetooth finding discoverable devices.
So it's an online click that's
and then will write the code over in main activity say public voyde find discoverable devices called
by V.
Now this will actually jump to a different intent again so we'll create an intent.
I which is going to be a new intent and once again we're using Bluetooth adapter and this time we're
looking for action request discoverable.
There we go and this will then jump to this screen.
Again you've probably seen before if you've worked with Android devices and Bluetooth or even Iowa has
it works in a very similar way.
This will take you to a screen which will show you the devices which are in a discoverable mode so your
smart watch or your headphones or whatever.
And then it will give you an opportunity to pair with them as well.
So you don't need to manage the pairing yourself.
That's done by the Android operating system.
And then all we need to do there is study activity so that then finds that discoverable devices our
final job is to view the Pead devices.
And this will tell us whether we've been successful with.
If we were trying to find and pay with a specific device so we're now viewing pad devices
that make method for that
and this one is a little more complicated.
We're going to need a set
which is very similar to a list it's subtly different and you can have a quick google to see what the
difference is between I set and a list are.
But essentially you can think of it just like a list.
And actually we're going to convert it to an array list in a minute as well.
So we'll call our set pad devices and we get that from Bluetooth adapter.
Don't get bonded devices.
So bonded is the word that we use in our code as opposed to pad.
And then if we want to display those on the table on the history we just need to set up the list.
So that's what it's ideas.
So it will create a list.
We could pad devices list view
this is going to be a list you should pay a capital V
fine view by ID card or ID dopehead devices list view.
And then we want to use an array adapter to display our information on the list view.
We can't do a direct display the information in the set on the list.
So we need to convert the set into an array adapter and array lists or
so I'll call this pad devices they list and this is going to be a new
array list and then we're going to loop through Pead devices that we've got here and just add them to
the list.
So we're just essentially converting the set into an array list so that we can use an array adapter
to display the information on the list view.
So we're going to use
a for loop and we're looking for Bluetooth devices.
So each of these is going to be a bluetooth device and
we'll call them Bluetooth device and we're going to get them from our pad devices set.
So we've done that before.
Yes and we're getting this error because we haven't specified the type of data that we want to have
an hour set.
If we just specify that to bluetooth device because we know that that's what's going to be returned
by this get bonded devices method so that should be fine then for each of these devices we want to get
the name and add it to the array list.
So if we take our devices array list and add we want to add Bluetooth device darte and I just want to
show you some of the information that you can get about these Bluetooth devices Bluetooth class address
type et cetera pairing confirmation set pin all sorts of things that you can do with those devices.
And the one that we want to do is get the name.
So that's going to add the name of the device to how Pead devices are released.
And then we create our array adapter.
This has been done before.
I'll call it a read up to.
And this is a new adapter using this and familiar Android lay out simple list item one.
And we're getting it from
pad devices.
Frailest.
And then finally we'll take our list view
and set the adapter.
There we go.
So I won't even bother running the app because as I say it won't do anything because we can't run that
on the simulator but if you download it from the next lecture or even better write it yourself then
you'll be able to work with at least the basic function of Bluetooth when you run it on a real device.
So that's how you do the basics of Bluetooth.
Obviously there's a lot more that you can do sending files and retrieving data etc. but that's all very
specific to the type of object that you want to connect to whether it be an older wino a smart watch
or anything else.
So I'll leave you to get that code from the web but this should get you started at least with how to
work with bluetooth on Android.